FLIP for purity/mutability analysis and restriction in function conditions (#1056)
onflow/flow: flips/20220715-cadence-purity-analysis.md

> # Function Purity 

Reviewer: Given that the proposal is not about pure functions anymore, maybe rename this proposal / language feature to "View functions", [similar to Solidity](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.13/contracts.html#view-functions).

| Status        | (Proposed)       |
:-------------- |:---------------------------------------------------- |
| **FLIP #**    | [1056](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/1056)     |
| **Author(s)** | Daniel Sainati (daniel.sainati@dapperlabs.com)       |
| **Sponsor**   | Daniel Sainati (daniel.sainati@dapperlabs.com)       |
| **Updated**   | 2022-08-25                                           |

## Objective

This FLIP proposes to add a new syntax and accompanying semantic analysis to determine or 

> enforce that a given function or method is "view", that is, lacking in side effects. We would
> then add an additional checker rule to enforce purity in function conditions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enforce that a given function or method is "view", that is, lacking in side effects.
 We would then add an additional checker rule to enforce that function conditions only call view functions.
```

## Motivation and User Benefit

An [issue](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues/1805) with function pre- and post-conditions allows arbitrary functions to be
called in these condition blocks, which can allow implementers to write underhanded code by modifying state inside of a condition. 
By allowing users to annotate their functions as `view`, we can enforce that these functions have no side effects that modify state
and thus permit these functions (and only these functions) to be called from within a condition. 

## Design Proposal

### Parsing

This adds a new keyword to the langauge: `view`. This is optionally placed before the `fun` keyword, but after the access modifier, 
in function declarations and expressions. So, for example, all of the following are valid:

```cadence
pub view fun foo(): Void {}
```

```cadence
view fun foo(): Void {}
```

```cadence
let x = view fun(): Void {}
```

```cadence
pub struct S {
    pub view fun foo(): Void {}
    view init()
}
```

```cadence
pub resource interface R {

>     priv view fun foo(): Void {}

Reviewer: Just as a side note for the implementation: The type checker will need to ensure that the function in the concrete type that implements the interface has the modifier it is given for the function in the interface. This conformance has to be checked for interfaces and nested type requirements

Author: Yes; the implementation already does this!

    pure init()
}
```

> Any functions that do not have a `pure` annotations will be considered impure. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any function that does not have the `pure` annotation will be considered impure. 
```

> Any function that does not have a `view` annotation will be considered impure. 
> 
> Function types can also have purity annotations, to be placed after the opening parenthesis but before the parameter list. So, for example, these are valid
> types:

Reviewer: Like for the name of the proposal/feature, maybe use "view" consistently instead of pure/impure/purity annotations, here, and in the rest of the proposal:

```suggestion
Any function that does not have a `view` annotation will be considered a non-view function. 

Function types can also have a `view` annotations, to be placed after the opening parenthesis but before the parameter list. So, for example, these are valid types:
```

```cadence
    let f: (pure (Int): Int) = ...
    let h: (pure (): (pure (): Void)) = ...
```

Any function types without an explicit purity annotation will be considered impure.

### Type Checking

> A function that is `pure` (if it was explicitly declared with the `pure` keyword) may not perform any operations with side effects 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A function that is `pure` (it was explicitly declared with the `pure` keyword) may not perform any operations with side effects 
```

that are entirely local to the function, or are function parameters, may be modified as normal. So, for example, this code would be allowed:

    ```cadence
    pure fun foo(): Int {
        let a: [Int] = []
        a.append(3)
        return a.length
    }
    ```

    while this would not:

    ```cadence
    let a: [Int] = []
    pure fun foo(): Int {
        a.append(3)
        return a.length
    }
    ```

    Note that it is not always possible to determine statically whether or not a mutation is occuring on a locally or externally scoped variable, 
as in this case, for example:

    ```cadence
    let a: [Int] = []
    pure fun foo(i: Int): Int {
        let b: [Int] = []
        let c = [a, b]
        c[i].append(4) // it is impossible to tell statically whether it is `a` or `b` that is receiving the write here
        return a.length
    }
    ```

    Cases like this will have to be rejected statically for safety.

* Writing to storage. This includes operations like `save` and `load` (since if a resource is loaded it will be moved out of storage), as well as `unlink`, but
not operations like `copy`, `borrow`, `type`, or `getCapability`.

> * Writing to account state. This includes operations like adding, updating or removing a contract and adding, updating or removing account keys.

Author: Yes; an alias would have the same type as the function it is aliasing, so any alias for an impure function will also be impure.

* Mutating a reference. Any writes to references will have to be rejected, as it is generally not possible to know what value is being referenced. Consider code like the following:

    ```cadence
    pure fun foo(a: [Int], b: bool): Int {
        let c: [Int] = &[] as &[Int]
        if b {
            c = &a as &[Int]
        }
        c.append(4) // it is impossible to tell statically whether `a` is receiving the write here
        return a.length
    }
    ```

> Any function declared to be `pure` will enforce that none of these operations occur in their bodies. If such an operation does occur, then the checker will report

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any functions declared to be `pure` will enforce that none of these operations occur in their bodies. If such an operation does occur, then the checker will report
```

    }
    ```

Any functions declared to be `view` will enforce that none of these operations occur in their bodies. If such an operation does occur, then the checker will report
an error identifying the impure operation. Impure function declarations have no additional typechecking behavior; any operations are permitted.

Note that the current design allows both emitting events and logging data from within a view function. These are traditionally considered side effects, but 
it is perhaps worth some discussion on whether or not these should be allowed in `view` functions.  

> Purity also interacts covariantly with function subtyping: `view` functions are a subtype of impure functions. So, the following declarations would typecheck:

Reviewer: As mentioned above, this also applies to interface and nested type requirement conformance, so maybe add this to the proposal and provide a similar example.

```cadence
    let a: (view (): Void) = view fun() {}
    let b: ((): Void) = view fun() {}
    let c: ((): Void) = fun() {}

>     let d: (((view (): Void)): Void) = fun foo(x:((): Void)) {} // contravariance

Reviewer: It looks like the extra parentheses for the first parameter of the function type are not necessary.
Maybe also make the comment more descriptive:

```suggestion
    let d: ((view (): Void): Void) = fun foo(f: ((): Void)) {} // function parameters are contravariant
```

```

while these would not: 

```cadence
    let x: (view (): Void) = fun() {}

>     let y: ((((): Void)): Void) = fun foo(f:(view (): Void)) {} // contravariance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    let y: (((): Void): Void) = fun foo(f: (view (): Void)) {} // function parameters are contravariant
```

```

Once purity is enforced in functions with `view` annotations, in order to require it in function conditions we can 
simply treat pre-conditions and post-conditions as view contexts as if they had `view` annotations themselves. 

### Drawbacks

> This adds additional complexity to the langauge; users will need to think about the purity of their functions and how they interact with each other in order 
> to use the new `view` annotations. However, these annotations are unlikely to be frequently required; they will only be necessary for functions that are 
> called from conditions (and functions called by those functions). Users will not need to interact with this system most of the time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposed feature adds additional complexity to the language; 
users will need to think about the side-effects of their functions and how they interact with each other in order  to use the new `view` annotation.
However, this annotation is unlikely to be frequently required; it will only be necessary for functions that are 
called from conditions (and functions called by those functions). 
Users will not need to interact with this language feature most of the time. 
```

Solidity has `view` and `pure` functions, which behave like `pure` and `const` in C++ respectively. 
If the distinction between `view` and `pure` is confusing for smart contract developers learning 
Cadence with some past Solidity experience, we might consider using `view` instead of `pure` for
this new syntax. 

Swift takes the opposite approach, having a `mutating` keyword that functions must use in order to
be allowed to mutate program state, essentially implying that functions are `pure` by default. Given
the large amount of existing code in Cadence however, adoption will be easier by default if impurity 
is the default assumption. 

## Questions and Discussion Topics

* Should `pure` functions be allowed to emit events and log data? These are technically side effects, but
they are not problematic for the specific use cases we have identified for this analysis. Are there any other
potential use cases for this analysis that would require events and logging to be restricted in `pure` contexts?

* Given that `pure` in Cadence is closer to `view` in Solidity, a language with which our users may be familiar, 

> should we instead consider using `view` instead of `pure` in our implementation of this feature?

Reviewer: 2 cents: I quite like Solidity's keywords/definitions, as they match more closely the typical definitions of what is considered a pure function, I'd go with `view`

Author: cc @SupunS @robert-e-davidson3 @bluesign @bjartek how do you all feel about this. I am ambivalent either way, but I want to get buy in from a majority of the FLIP commenters before i make the switch.

Reviewer 3: `view` seems better for me personally.

# Function Purity 

| Status        | (Proposed)       |
:-------------- |:---------------------------------------------------- |

> | **FLIP #**    | [NNN](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/NNN) (update when you have PR #)|

Author: ```suggestion
| **FLIP #**    | [1056](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/1056) |
```

the ability to know whether an operation is "pure", or whether it has the potential to modify state. 

The [FLIP to prevent mutation of public fields](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/703) attempted 
to prevent fields in structs and resources, but was only able to prevent mutation of array and dictionary
fields; nested composites could not be enforced because we did not have a mechanism for knowing what 
composite methods were "mutating". However, if we could know whether a function or method is `pure`, we
could restrict the calleable methods on such fields to be only `pure` ones. 

Similarly, a [FLIP](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/1043) and an [issue](https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues/1304)
that suggest improvements to references to make them less powerful and prone to safety-footguns suggest to limit the 
operations that can be performed on references, or to allow the creation of read-only references. However, these
restrictions would only be enforceable at runtime, since we do not have a way statically to decide whether an operation is
read-only. However, if we could know whether a function or method is `pure`, we could require that such references only 

> perform `pure` operations or are passed to `pure` functions. 

Reviewer 4: Would be nice to have some examples of how this FLIP would solve the other issues/FLIPs mentioned in this section

to see at a glance where state modification (and side-effects in general) are occuring in their code. 

## Design Proposal

### Parsing

This adds two new keywords to the langauge: `pure` and `impure`. These are optionally placed before the `fun` keyword, but after the access modifier, 
in function declarations and expressions. So, for example, all of the following are valid:

```cadence
pub pure fun foo(): Void {}
```

```cadence
impure fun foo(): Void {}
```

```cadence
let x = pure fun(): Void {}
```

```cadence
pub struct S {
    pub pure fun foo(): Void {}
    impure init()
}
```

```cadence
pub resource interface R {
    priv pure fun foo(): Void {}
    impure init()
}
```

It is syntactically valid to omit the purity modifier in a function declaration or expression, although in circumstances the type checker
may reject code that is lacking required annotations (see below).

Function types can also have purity annotations, to be placed after the opening parenthesis but before the parameter list. So, for example, these are valid
types:

```cadence
    let f: (pure (Int): Int) = ...
    let g: (impure (String): String) = ...
    let h: (pure (): (impure (): Void)) = ...
```

> Any function types without an explicit purity annotation will be considered `impure`. 

Author: Purity inference would only infer purity for unannotated function values. Function types (like `(():void)`) won't be able to have their purity inferred this way, so they need a sensible default.

### Type Checking

A function that is `pure` (e.g. if it was explicitly declared with the `pure` keyword) may not perform any operations with side effects 
within its body. Operations with side effects for the purpose of this analysis are:

* Calling a function that is not `pure`

* Mutating or modifying a value that was declared outside the scope of the function body (including the parameters themselves). Variables 
that are entirely local to the function may be modified as normal. So, for example, this code would be allowed:

    ```cadence
    pure fun foo(): Int {
        let a: [Int] = []
        a.append(3)
        return a.length
    }
    ```

    while the following are not:

    ```cadence
    pure fun foo(a: [Int]): Int {
        a.append(3)
        return a.length
    }

>     ```

Author: Ah ok, so it seems like we should be able to allow function arguments to have mutations since they are copied. However, the core of this example remains the same if `a` is captured from outside; so I will change the FLIP to demonstrate this instead.

    ```cadence
    let a: [Int] = []
    pure fun foo(): Int {
        a.append(3)
        return a.length
    }
    ```

    Note that it is not always possible to determine statically whether or not a mutation is occuring on a locally or externally scoped variable, 
as in this case, for example:

    ```cadence
    pure fun foo(a: [Int], i: Int): Int {
        let b: [Int] = []
        let c = [a, b]

>         c[i].append(4) // it is impossible to tell statically whether it is `a` or `b` that is receiving the write here

Author: Same as above.
